

Chapterl


0964CH01
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS



As we look at our surroundings, we see a large variety of things with different shapes, sizes

Activity	1.1
• Fill half the  beaker with wabtand

and textures. Everything in this universe is	•	Takea	lOO mL beaker.
made up of material which scientists have		 mark the level of water. named "matter". The air we breathe, the food	•	Dissolve some salt/ sugar with we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and		 ofa glass rod.
animals, even a small drop of water or a	•	Observe any change in
particle of sand - every thing is matter. We	•	What do you think has	e	d to
can also see as we look around that all the	the salt?
things mentioned above occupy space and	ere does it dis	?
have mass. In other words, they have both	oes the levi of	a	ange?
mass_* and volu e**.	.	rder to "rt	sqeuestions we Smc early times, hum n bemgs ?ave 0 ustehie.._ t matter is made up
been trying to understand theirsurround1	p	ere in the spoon, salt
Early Indian philosophers classified matt	n	O	ugar  s	w read throughout water.
the form of fi e basice. lement	his is	lu	in Fig. 1. 1.
"Panch Tatvd'- air, earth, fire, sky a	wate .
According to them everything, li ·n			r no living, was made up of these			e		c elements. Ancient Greek ph	!'111 11.cs had arrived at a similar classificatio		f matter.
types of classification rr-'<!-tl r based on their		Add s:it	C		Sti/ physical properties a	ical	Partic_Ies of':a_ter		Salt
In  this chapter	11 learn	magnified m1lhons

ma tt er

b ase d

on 1·t s ph y. s1c

.	.	of times

Chemical aspects of matter will	ta	n up
in subsequent chapters.	Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve saltin water, the particles of salt get into the spaces between particles
1.1 of water.
1.1.1 MATTER IS MA OF PARTICLES

For a long time, twVc-hools of thought prevailed regarding the -.i f matter. One school believed matt to e continuous like a block of wood, · eother thought that matter was ma up f particles like sand. Let us perform an tivity to decide about the nature of matter - is it continuous or particulate?
*  The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg).
1.1.2 
How SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES
OF MATTER?
Activity	1.2
• Take 2-3 crystals of potassium permanganate and dissolve them in 100 mL of water.

** The SI unit of volume is cubic metre (m3). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that lL = 1 dm3• lL = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm3.

• Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear

1.2.2 p AR TIC LES


OF	MATTER	ARE

water.
• Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water.
• Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to 8 times.
• Is the water still coloured ?

CONTINUOUSLY MOVING

Activity	1.3
• Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to get its smell?
• Now light the incense stick. What happens? Do you get the smell sitting
at a distance?
• Record your observations.





Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small are the particles of

















The particles of matt they are small beyond

Activity

-	1.5

1.2 Characteristics of Parti Matter
1.2.1 PARTICLES OF M	VE SPACE BETWEEN Tiyt
In activities 1.1 a!G		saw that particles of sugar, sal D ttol, or potassium permangan	ly distributed in water.
Similarly,   e  we make tea, coffee or
lemonade (ni   paani), particles of one type of matter get into the spaces between particles of the other. This shows that there is enough space between particles of matter.
• 
Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium permanganate into a glass
of hot water and another containing cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom.
• What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass?
• What happens as time passes?
• What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid?
• Does the rate of mixing change with temperature? Why and how?
   From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following:


2	SCIENCE

   Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, particles move faster. So, we can say that with
increase in temperature the kinetic energy of
• 
If we consider each student as a particle of matter, then in which group the particles held each other with the maximum force?

the particles also increases.

Activity

-	1.7

   In the above three activities we observe that particles of matter intermix on their own with each other. They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two different types of matter on their own is called diffusion. We also observe that on heating, diffusion becomes faster. Why does this happen?

1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT
EACH OTHER
• 
Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band.
• Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching.
• In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force?

Activity 	
• Take some water in a
cutting the surface f	t your

& fingers.

Activity

-	1.6

Nere you able t u	heurface  of

• Play this game in the field- make four

ater?	?
Mlhat cou	e r sobnehind the

groups and form human chains as	rface of	it_e1'e aining together?
• ; !g  ::f:group should hold ea	Theabo e	vities (1.6, 17. and	1.8)
other from the back and lock			ggest=h	·		les of matter have force like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig.	).	acting	twe		em. This force keeps the
part	er. The  strength of this force of
att	varies from one kind of matter to
<J

fig o
• The second grou ld hold hands to form a&n chain.
• The thir	r	hould form a chain
by tou n	ac other with only their
• fN in, e. ourth group of students sli ld n around and try to break the thre uman chains one by one into as many small groups as possible.
• Which group was the easiest to break? Why?
1. 
Which of the following are matter?
Chair, air, love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of pe,jume.
2. Give reasons for the following observation:
The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell.from coldfood you have to go close.
3. A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show?
4. What are the characteristics of the particles of matter?


MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS	3

1.3 States of Matter
Observe different types of matter around you. What are its different states? We can see that matter around us exists in three different states- solid, liquid and gas. These states of matter arise due to the variation in the characteristics of the particles of matter.
   Now, let us study about the properties of these three states of matter in detail.

the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks.
• The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal remains fixed, whether we
take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in ajar.
• A sponge has minute holes, in which
air is trapped, when we press it, the air
is expelled out and we are able to compress it.

1.3.1 THE  SOLID STATE


1.3.2 
THE  LIQUID STATE

1.b

• Collect the following articles- a pen,	•	Collect the following:
a book, a needle and a piece of wooden	(a) water, cooking oil, milk,	, stick.		cold drink.
• Sketch the shape of the  above articles	(b)  containers of di	.  ut
around them.	using a measur  ••'
• Doallthese have a definite shape,	thelabor t	"7


• Are these capable of diffusing into eat;	tran fe t		o		ferent contamers one other?		by o e.	e	he volume remain the
• Try compressing them by ap ly g		sam		fth l"	•ct	-	th force. Are you able to compress	•		ape O  e	iqm	remam  e
e
   All the above are examples o	We	 O   you pour the liquid from one can observe that all these have efinite		n- teintoranother, does it flow shape, distinct boundarie,-.,--r-no-.,ixed volumes,		asily·
that is, have negligible c  res "bility. Solids		We observe that liquids have no fixed have a tendency to maint·	shape w  .. shape but have a fixed volume. They take up subjected to outside force. o ids a	 thshapee of the container in which they are under force but it is difficult to cli'  e  eir  kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they shape, so they are rigid.		are not rigid but can be called fluid.

Cons1·cter th e 10 11ow·ing:
   
Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 where we saw that solids and liquids can diffuse into

(a) What about aelilii d,canit	liquids. The gases from the atmosphere
change its shape·o etching? Isit	diffuse and dissolve in water. These gases,
a solid?	especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, are
(b) What a			and salt? When	essential for the survival of aquatic animals kept in	iffe	n jars these take the	and plants.
h	ar. Are they solid?	All living creatures need to breathe for
(c) 	t a sponge? It is a solid	survival. The aquatic animals can breathe able to compress it. Why?	 under water due to the presence of dissolved
All the above are solids as:	oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that
• A rubber band changes shape under	 solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into force and regains the same shape when	liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is

4	SCIENCE

higher than that of solids. This is due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state.

1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE
Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling a large number of balloons from a single cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many balloons is he able to fill from one cylinder. Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder.
   
We have observed that gases are highly compressible as compared to solids and liquids. The liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cylinder that we get in our home for cooking or the  oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compressed gas. Compressed natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compressibility, large volumes of a gas can be compressed into a small cylinder and transported easily.
   We come to know of what is being cooked in the kitchen without even entering there, by the smell that reaches our nostrils. How
does this smell reach us? The part	he

Activity

-	1.11

aroma of food mix with the part·

• Take three 100 mL syringes and close

spread from the kitchen, reach farther away. The smell of h

their nozzles by  rubber corks, as	reaches us in seconds; compar
• Remove  the  pistons from all  the	rate of diffusion of solid	e to
syringes.	eed of particles	d	rge space
• Leaving one  syringe untouched,  fill	them, g.i.:se	he property of
water in the second and pieces of chalk	very f; "f	gases.
in the third.	,.,_i"'l'III_.	e gaseo	f	,	e particles move

• Ins_ert the  pistons back into t_he

speed. Due to this

synnges. You may apply some vaseh	mo	e	, the  particles hit each
?n the pisto1:-s before insei:-tinge	ther an	alls of the container. The
mto  the  synnges for theirs	oth	pressur	e	bythe gas is because of this

movement.

1+-orce	y gas pa rt·1c1es per um·t area

• Now, t ry to compress	e	b	.
pushing the piston in ea	e.	.,/	w	ls of the contamer.
t










Liquid	[bl



• Wha	o you observe? In which case was the piston easily pushed in?
• What do you infer from your observations?

Fig.1.5: a, b and c show the magnified schematic pictures of the three states of matter. The motion of the particles can be seen and compared in the three states of matter.


MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS	5

uestions	1.4.1 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE

1. The mass per unit volume of a substance is called density.

Activity

-	1.12

(density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in order of increasing density - air; exhaust from chimneys, honey, water; chalk, cotton and iron.
2. (a) Tabulate the differences in the characterisitcs of states of matter.
• 
Take about 150 gof ice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory thermometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6.




Iron

(b) Comment upon the following: rigidity, compressibility, fluidity, filling a gas container, shape, kinetic energy and density.
3. Give reasons
(a) A gas fills completely the vessel in which it is kept.
(b) A gas exerts pressure on the
walls of the container.
(c) A wooden table should b
called a solid.
(d) We can easily move our  nd

stand












:Q

Thermome	I

11--- Glass














(a)

in air	but	to do h through a solid bl	d
we need a karate e	rt.	'(.I
4. Liquids gene§have  ower
density as c	ar		to solids.	Iron-- Buyotu must		served th/f>	 stand ice.floats on wa er. Find		()=[1J







,	Thermometer

11	Glass stirrer


1.4 Can Matter Change itMs	e?

We all know from our ob 'Ot.at water can exist in three states
• solid, as ice,
• liquid, as the	iliar water, and

   What h p e  i 'de the matter during this chang	a e. What happens to the particles o at er during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, isn't it?


Water







(b)


Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion of water to water vapour


6	SCIENCE

• Start heating the beaker on a low flame.
• Note the temperature when the ice starts melting.
• Note the temperature when all the ice has converted into water.
• Record your observations for this conversion of solid to liquid state.
• Now, put a glass rod in the beaker and heat while stirring till the water starts
boiling.
• Keep a careful eye on the thermometer reading till most of the water has vaporised.
• Record your observations for the conversion of water in the liquid state
to the gaseous state.

state by overcoming the forces of attraction between the particles. As this heat energy is absorbed by ice without showing any rise in temperature, it is considered that it gets hidden into the contents of the beaker and is known as the latent heat. The word latent means hidden. The amount of heat energy that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting point is known as the latent heat of fusion. So, particles in water at 0° C (273 K) have more energy as compared to particles in ice at the same temperature.
   When we supply heat energy particles start moving even faster.
temperature, a point is reached	e

   On increasing the temperature of solids, particles have enough energy		e the kinetic energy of the particles increases.  from the forces of attraction of	 her. At Due to the increase in kinetic energy, the this temperature the li -		anging  particles start vibrating with greater speed. ·		. The tempera r t ich a liquid The energy supplied by heat overcomes the			iling at th a o ric pressure is forces of attraction between the particles. The					its bo i "": t oiling is a bulk particles leave their fixed positions and start "JI: non. P		m the bulk of the moving more freely. A stage is reached wh				n		rgy to change into the the solid melts and is converted to a li  d	state.
The minimum temperature at whic   O	For wa	temperature  is 373 K
melts to become a liquid at the atm sphe ·c   (10	l O =  373 K).
pressure is called its melting		'-#=.	 efme the latent heat of vap		o it in the same way as we d the latent heat of fusion.

of

The melting point	273.15 inifl
process of melting, tha  1s, ch n
state into liquid state is also kno	as	s1on.

t·	steam, that is, water vapour at
      (100° C) have more energy than water t the same temperature. This is because particles in steam have absorbed extra energy in the form of latent heat of vaporisation.

When a solid melts, its te	ture		

,cHe-a-t 1


remains the same, so wh does  e heat energy go?
   You must have		during the experiment of melting:he temperature of the system ot change after the melting point is r  e , till all the ice melts. This happen ' ough we continue to heat the be		is, we continue to supply heat. T ·	gets used up in changing the

Solid State 		Liquid State ..	Gaseous StateI
Cool

   So, we infer that the state of matter can be changed into another state by changing the temperature.
   We have learnt that substances around us change state from solid to liquid and from liquid to gas on application of heat. But there


*Note:  lvinis the SI unit of temperature, 0°C =273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0°C = 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature.
MATTER IN OUR  SURROUNDINGS	7

are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state.
Activity	1.13

enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter?

• Take some camphor or ammonium chloride. Crush it and put it in a china dish.

Piston
Cylinder

Piston
Cylinder

Piston
Cylinder

• Put an inverted funnel over the china dish.
• Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7.

i	Cotton plug

. +

-----+	0


Ammonium chloride

-	Inverted funnel

vapours

Fig. 1.8: Byapplying pressure, p rtic es	rcan

solidified



China dish



Burner



Fig. 1. 7: Sublimation of ammoniu c	i

• Now, heat slowly and obse

bbroughet close toge

 hring	presf111Ur	reducing t	;	e clai n
yoheuard	( d carbon dioxide
    ?It is sto		igh  pressure.  Solid ets con r				ectly to gaseous state decreas		o		r	 sure to 1 atmosphere* hout [Il'll ll toliquid state. This is the reaso.	a	li carbon dioxide is also known
as'°	e can say that pressure and

• Wth·a.t d? o you infer from the	ove

e	a't ure

d et

ermi• ne th

e st at

e of	a

ac ivity.	stance, whether it will be solid, liquid or
   A change of state dire		solid to	ga · without changing into liq	state is ca sublimation and the direct chan

solid without changing into liquid c ed deposition.
1.4.2 EFFECT OF cHArW
We have already le tha	difference in various states of atter is due to the difference in t§Es cesbetween the constituent parti es.  at will happen when




Solid

Liquid




Sublimation) 
 (		Gas
Deposition

we start pu	ure and compress a gas


Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter



* atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere= 1.01 x 105 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure.

8	SCIENCE

uestions
1. Convert the following temperature to celsius scale:
a. 300 K	b.  573 K.
2. What is the physical state of water at:
a. 250QC	b.
3. For any substance, why does the temperature remain constant during the change of state?
4. Suggest a method to liquefy atmospheric gases.

1.5 Evaporation

dish and keep it inside a cupboard or on a shelf in your class.
• Record the room temperature.
• Record the time or days taken for the evaporation process in the above cases.
• Repeat the above three steps of activity on  a rainy day and record your
observations.
• What do you infer about the effect of temperature, surface area and wind velocity (speed) on evaporation?
   You must have observed that the rate of evaporation increases with-
• an increase of surface area:
We know that evaporation is	su	ce

Do we always need to heat or change pressure	 phenomenon. If the sur				is for changing the state of matter? Can you	 increased, the rate of			ration quote some examples from everyday life where	increases. For exa		e putting change of state from liquid to vapour takes es for drying w  re dthem out. place without the liquid reaching the boiling  •		ncrease o e	e:
point? W ter, when left uncovered, slowly			the in	mperature, more changes mto vapour. Wet clothes dry up.		mbe of a -.c getenough kinetic What happens to water in the above	energy  O  O he vapour state.
examples?	.	a d cr  s  ·   umidity:
We know that particles of	Hu  ·dit · the amount of water vapour

a• lways moving and.

are never . at r	t. At.	e;

ai.r. Th e a.i.r around

us cannot

kinetic energy. In the case ofli ·ds, small	w r vapour ata g vet_emperatur . If fraction of particles at the surfa ,		e amount of water airisalready high, higher kinetic energy to break awa "'    the_rate of e:apo:at10n decreases.
from the forces of attr  io   other pa · es	an mcrease m wind speed:
and gets converte	vapour i	It is a common observation that clothes phenomenon of change of  r	 dry faster on a windy day. With the
vapours at any temperature belo	increase in wind speed, the particles of
point is called evaporation.	water vapour move away with the wind,             decreasing the amount of water vapour
1.5.1 f ACTORS AFFE	PORATION	in the surrounding.
Let us understand thi	activity.	1.5.2 How DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE
COOLING?
In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on evaporating. The particles of liquid absorb energy from the surrounding to regain the energy lost during evaporation. This absorption of energy from the surroundings make the surroundings cold.
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS	9

   What happens when you pour some acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? The particles gain energy from your palm or surroundings and evaporate causing the palm to feel cool.
   After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle water on the roof or open ground because the large latent heat of vaporisation of water helps to cool the hot surface.
   Can you cite some more examples from daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling due to evaporation?
Why should we wear cotton clothes in

Why do we see water droplets on the outer surface of a glass containing ice-cold water?
   Let us take some ice-cold water in a tumbler. Soon we will see water droplets on the outer surface of the tumbler. The water vapour present in air, on coming in contact with the cold glass of water, loses energy and gets converted to liquid state, which we see as water droplets.

cooler0l

summer?	1.  Why does a desert
   During summer, we perspire more		 better on a hot dry day? because of the mechanism of our body which	2. How does the water kept r	an keeps us cool. We know that during		earthen pot (matka) be evaporation, the particles at the surface of		 during summer?
the liquid gain energy from the surroundings	3.  Why does our	cold

or body surface and change into vapour. The

we pu	ac tone or

heat energy equal to the latent heat of	petrol or p.,-Ji			. vaporisation is absorbed from the body	 Why ar	Te		siphotet oar leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good	 milk fas		'	asaucer rather
absorber of water  helps in absorbing  th";	th	?
sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere fa	5.	if clothes should we
easy evaporation.	ummer?


10	SCIENCE

What you have learnt

• Matter is made up of small particles.
• The matter around us exists in three states- solid, liquid and gas.
• The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gase
• The spaces in between the constituent particles an	ki	tic

energy of the particles are minimum in the intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases. '(.I

ds,

• Thearrangement of a icles is most ord he case of solids, in the case o  uids layers rJfiJf·-;,,,,. slip and slide over each o		 or gase e s order, particles just move about	ly.
• The states	re inter- b e.Thsteate of matter

can be
• 

changing Vrature  or pressure.


st	te	·t	going t	u	liquid state.
• De	i 1	is		p. e	f gaseous state directly to solid state		"thout	ug)J. liquid state.
 t.?'").oiling i b, 11<phenomenon. Particles from the bulk whole) ovquid change into vapour state.
• Ev n isasurface phenomenon. Particles from the surfaĄn enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction
/f1""(tent in the liquid and change into the vapour state.
V rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed
* "-'o theatmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the wind speed.
Evaporation causes cooling.
           • Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change "	...,	 1 kg  of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling
point.
• Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point.
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS	11

• Some measurable quantities and their units to remember:

Quantity
Unit
Symbol



Temperature
kelvin
K
Length
metre
m
Mass
kilogram
kg
Weight
newton
N
Volume
cubic metre
m3
Density
kilogram per cubic metre
kg m-3
Pressure
pascal
Pa



Exercises	x_
1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale.  V
(a) 293 K	(b) 470 K	t,
2. Convert the following temperatures to the k


(a) Naphthalene	ear	wi	hout  leaving
anysolid
(b) We can g	t	s	11 of perf	e	ting several metres
'"'11111
4. Arrange the ollo ·	substa creasing order of  forces
ofattr ct	n the p	ic	-water, sugar, oxygen.
5. What	sical st 
(a) 25	.(	(c) 100°c?
6. @):wo reasons to j ify-
(	ater at  temperature isa liquid.
an iron	ir. his	a solid at room temperature.
7. Why is tt,,/:!!\1 K more effective in cooling than water at the
same tem'Ą1re?
8. wi-noduces more severe burns, boiling water or steam?
9. .B,C,D,E andFinthefollowing diagram showing

'\l

e initstaste

-	;


Increase heat and

..:..".'	decreasepressure
	 -----------<F>---------
Decrease heat andI
• 4-----I1 increase pressure >----


12	Sc/ENCE

Group Activity
Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids, liquids and gases.
For making this model you will need
• A transparent jar
• A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet
• A string
• Few chick-peas or black gram or dry green peas.
How to make?

• Put the seeds in the jar.
• Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and tape to keep it tied securely.

name

• Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouthb}	ar.
• Your model is ready. Now run your finger		wn the string by first tuggin	slowly and then	i		.



Transparent Jar













(c) 0

?






Pull the string first slowly, then vigorously to show movement of particles as in solids, liquids and gases.

Fig odeljornxwe,t;ng of soUd to liqwd and liquid to gas.

"-,0
0V





MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS	13


